Hello, and welcome to a reintroduction
to Uniform Type Identifiers.
My name is Jonathan Grynspan,
and I work on the App Discovery and
Engagement team at Apple.
The last time we talked about Uniform
Type Identifiers was at WWDC 2004.
That was a long time ago.
I remember it like it was yesterday.
Apple's 2004 product
lineup was classic cool,
with products like the all-aluminum
design of the PowerBook G4,
the eye-popping colors of the iPod Mini,
and the magical home theater
experience of the iMac G5.
Apple has stayed awesome,
but you've got to admit,
2004 really was a long time ago.
So,
we're going to cover the basics today,
starting with how Apple's operating
systems determine the type of a file.
Then, we'll explore how to tell
the system about new file
types it doesn't know about,
and how to handle them.
Finally,
we'll explore some new API in iOS
14 and macOS Big Sur that makes
working with file types a breeze.
Whether you're new to the subject or not,
we have something for you,
so stick around.
Let's take a look at a file that
could be on anybody's computer:
a photo of a cat using an iPad Mini.
When you save that picture to disk,
it produces what's called a regular file.
That's POSIX terminology for a
sequence of bytes stored on disk.
Later on,
when you want to open this photo again,
you can double-click it,
and it will just work,
opening in an image viewer like Preview.
But how does the system
know that this is an image,
in this case saved as JPEG,
rather than a text file, or an MP3 track,
or a Pages document?
Files are sequences of bytes,
so you might expect that when the
system needs to know the type of a file,
it cracks it open and reads the
bits inside to figure it out.
Actually,
the system almost never does that,
because it's extremely expensive
and requires read permissions
most processes don't have.
In fact, the operating system bases
most of its decisions on the
file's path extension — that is,
the case-normalized substring
following the last period character
— so long as it does not contain any
whitespace or control characters.
On Apple's platforms,
we don't typically show recognized
path extensions to the user,
but they're still there.
If we reveal this file's path extension,
we can see that it is JPEG,
so this is a JPEG image.
So .jpeg means a JPEG image, right?
Yes, but there are other path
extensions for JPEG images.
.jpg and .jpe are the most common.
On the web, however,
it's a different story.
Web servers don't generally identify
files by their path extension.
Instead,
they use something called a MIME type,
or media type.
For JPEG, that's image/jpeg.
Of course,
nothing in life is ever that simple,
and some servers instead use the common
but non-standard image/jpg mind type.
That's five different pieces of metadata,
all representing exactly the same thing.
Well, on Apple's platforms, that's okay,
because we use a single string
called a Uniform Type Identifier to
canonically identify this file format.
For JPEG images,
the Uniform Type Identifier
is public.jpg.
This one string refers
to all JPEG images,
whether they're local or on the web.
Now,
an interesting property of file types
is that they exist in a hierarchy.
Every JPEG image is also,
more abstractly, an image,
as are PNG images, TIFF images, etc.
When talking about
Uniform Type Identifiers,
we say that the JPEG type conforms
to the more abstract image type.
This conformance tree implicitly
allows for multiple inheritance.
If you think about it,
this is sort of like how protocols
work in Swift and Objective-C.
A concrete class or struct can
inherit from any number of protocols.
Let me show you what I mean.
Here's public.jpg.
And here's public.image,
which is an abstract type that
describes all image file formats.
But all image file formats can be
represented as sequences of bytes.
So public.image conforms to public.data,
which is a very abstract type
representing any regular file on disk,
or really any sequence of bytes
regardless of where they're stored.
In turn,
public.data conforms to one final type:
public.item.
All file system objects — be they files,
folders, symlinks,
or even something more esoteric
such as POSIX pipes — are
represented by public.item.
Just as we can go up the hierarchy,
we can travel down it.
There are image formats other than JPEG,
such as public.png and public.tiff,
and they are also
subtypes of public.image.
However, they are not part of the
conformance hierarchy of public.jpg
— they're just its siblings.
If we move up a level
and focus on public.data,
we can see that there are
many types that conform to it,
because nearly everything on
your computer can be represented
by a sequence of bytes.
Here we see public.audio,
which is an abstract type
describing audible sounds,
and public.text,
which is an abstract type
describing legible text.
There are subtypes of public.data
and siblings of public.image.
I mentioned a while back that
multiple inheritance is possible
with Uniform Type Identifiers.
And that's true of images,
because images are data,
but they're also content that
the user cares about — something
the user might want to upload to
iCloud Drive or share over AirDraw.
So, public.image also conforms
to public.content,
which doesn't represent anything
concrete in the file system,
but does tell us that we should
treat its subtypes as things
that are important to the user.
I've focused pretty heavily on how
Uniform Type Identifiers represent files.
That's probably the most
common use for them,
as far as users are concerned.
But we use them throughout our
platforms for other purposes,
too.
For instance,
we also use them as the canonical
type of pasteboard content.
After all, if you can save it to disk,
you can copy and paste it, too.
We also use them for hierarchies
that have nothing to do with files.
This is a bit of an Apple secret,
but we also use Uniform
Type Identifiers to identify
different models of hardware we ship.
All Mac models, for instance,
conform to com.apple.mac.
And if we want to get hypothetical,
you could even use Uniform
Type Identifiers to refer to
hierarchies unrelated to computers,
such as the Tree of Life.
That's what Uniform Type Identifiers are
and how we use them on our platforms.
Many apps create and maintain
their own data formats,
and these formats deserve
their own unique types.
When you create a new type,
how do you add it to the type hierarchy?
If you're using types
declared by the system,
you don't need to do much.
We include a large number of types
in a bundle called CoreTypes in
/system/library/coreservices.
Any Uniform Type Identifier in that
bundle's Info.plist can be referenced
by your app without additional changes.
But for types you invented or which
you're borrowing from another app,
you may need to tell
the system about them.
To do so, you need to create your own
uniform type identifier.
When creating your own
Uniform Type Identifier,
there are a few naming rules to follow.
First, Uniform Type Identifiers
are always case-insensitive
ASCII and always reverse DNS,
such as com.example.file.
Ideally, you'll use some more
descriptive identifiers.
com.example.file doesn't
really make it easy to debug.
Com.example.imageTemplate or
com.example.encryptedDatabase or
something like that would be better.
Apple reserves some prefixes
or namespaces in identifiers,
and you should not create your own
identifiers that use these namespaces.
The system may ignore them if you do.
First is Public,
which is reserved for use by
Apple to declare standardized types.
If we're missing a standardized type,
please let us know via
the feedback assistant.
DYN, short for dynamic,
is reserved for use by
the operating system when
generating compatibility shims.
They're typically opaque strings and
they can change between OS releases,
so don't hardcode their values.
In practice,
they're fairly rare these days.
You typically only see them
when encountering a file with
an unrecognized path extension.
com.example is reserved for templates,
examples, sample code, and the like.
Finally,
com.apple is reserved for use by Apple.
There are two broad steps you
need to take when adding a
type to your application that
the system will recognize.
The first step is to declare the type.
Declaring a type basically
means your app is saying,
"This type exists," but doesn't
mean you can open the type.
If you actually want to open a type,
you need to support the type,
which is your app's way of saying,
"No matter who declared the type,
I can open it." These two
steps are distinct.
When you declare your type,
you need to decide whether
you will import or export it.
If you are using a type that was
invented or designed by somebody else,
or for use primarily
with another application,
you should typically import the type.
That tells the system, "This type exists.
Here is some information about it." But,
if the app that invented it is installed,
that app can provide more
authoritative information.
On the other hand,
if you invented the type,
or it's meant for use
specifically with your app,
it is appropriate to export it.
This tells the system,
"I am authoritative for
this type." Finally,
if you are using a type that ships
with the system as part of Core Types,
you don't need to import or export it.
The system has already
provided a declaration,
and you can just use the type's
Uniform Type Identifier immediately.
I'd like to show you how to declare
a type in your app and how to show
the system you support opening it.
So let's take a look at Xcode,
where I'm hard at work on a brand new
restauranting-over-the-web experience.
This app has the ability to read
restaurant menus that have been saved
in a JSON-based format we've designed.
We want to be able to open
those menu files in our app,
so we'll need to first
declare a type for them.
Because we created this type
ourselves and we own the format,
it makes sense for us to export the type.
The first thing we'll do in
Xcode is select the project
itself to reveal its settings.
We want to select the target
corresponding to our app.
Right now, I'm looking at our iOS app,
but we'd do the same
thing for a macOS app.
Then we'll switch over to the Info tab,
which represents the contents
of an app's Info.plist file.
Expand the Exported
Type Identifiers section.
Click the Add button at the bottom
of the section to add a new type.
The first thing we want to add is the
uniform type identifier we came up with.
For this demo,
we'll use com.example.restaurantMenu.
Remember, com.example is reserved by
Apple for use in examples and demos.
You'll usually want to use a
reverse DNS name that you own.
For instance,
the company Clarus would use com.clarus,
while Beats would use com.beatsbydre.
Now we have to think about conformance.
Types that represent files in the
file system need to conform to
public.data if they're regular files,
that is, sequences of bytes,
or to com.apple.package if they're
directories that the operating
system should treat as files.
This type is going to be saved to
disk using Swift's JSON encoder,
which means it's a sequence of bytes.
That means regular file,
and that means public.data.
Looks like we have a decision to make.
Because these files
will contain JSON data,
they will be readable by anything
that can read a JSON file.
That means the type can
also conform to public.json.
That's a really useful
property for some file types,
where the ability to edit
them manually is important.
But for other types,
it's an implementation detail only.
We'll add conformance to
public.json for this type.
You can skip these sorts of
implementation details when creating
your types if you don't want
other developers to rely on them,
or if you expect your type's
format may change in the future.
This file type is something the
user would consider a document,
or content worth
interacting with directly.
So we'll also make sure it
conforms to public.content.
Next, we'll need to decide on a file name
extension to associate with our type.
This extension will tie the type back
into the file system and allow the
system to recognize that appropriately
named files have this type.
We may be tempted to use a
three-character extension,
but no major platform vendor has required
three-character extensions since 1995.
We have lots of room to breathe here,
and avoiding conflicts
with other developers' type
declarations is important.
So we'll use a longer extension,
Restaurant Menu.
Note that we didn't put a dot there
— the operating system knows to add
it for us when creating file names.
Lastly, this is also a good opportunity
to come up with a human-readable
name for this type.
Since our app is simply
called Restaurant,
and since we picked the
extension Restaurant Menu,
we'll keep this simple and
name it Restaurant Menu.
This string is localizable in
our Info.plist.strings file.
Use the string we just typed
as your key when localizing.
Now that we've declared the type,
we need to tell the system that
our app is able to open it.
Expand the Document Types section.
Click the Add button at the bottom of
the section to add a new supported type.
This section is simpler than the
exported Type Identifiers section.
The only thing we're required to
specify is the list of Uniform
Type Identifiers the app supports.
To allow for flexibility,
we can specify multiple types
for a single entry here.
Or one per entry.
I personally prefer
having one type per entry,
but it's mostly a question
of personal preference,
like tabs versus spaces.
Anyway, we'll add our uniform type
identifier to this field.
We should also set this
entry's handler rank to Owner.
This step isn't required,
but it's strongly recommended because
it helps the system intelligently
pick the right app for a given job.
Since we invented this type, we own it.
On macOS,
there is an additional role field
that lets us specify whether we can
open files as an editor or a viewer.
Editors can both open and
save files of a given type,
while viewers can only open them.
Because our app can both
read and write these files,
we'd specify "Editor." We're
done editing the info section.
Our app can now open our
restaurant menu files.
We'll need to write some SwiftUI, UIKit,
or AppKit code to handle the document
once the system passes it to us.
For more information on building a
document-based application in SwiftUI,
check out "Build Document-Based
Apps in SwiftUI" from WWDC20.
Documentation for building document-based
applications using UIKit and AppKit is
available online at developer.apple.com.
Our app has a competitor
on the App Store,
Compies Food.
Lots of restaurant owners use that
app and have saved their menus in
the file format owned by that app.
We want to also support
reading those files.
This type was invented by somebody else,
and we're only borrowing it,
so we need to import it
instead of export it.
Let's head back to the Info tab
for our app target and select
Imported Type Identifiers.
Note that because we
created a new SwiftUI app,
we have an existing entry
here for an example type.
We can replace the contents
of the form with our own data,
which is what I'll do.
If we didn't have an existing
example type in our target,
we could, of course,
add a new type with the Add button below.
I'll fill in the info section
specified by Compies Food.
Of course,
the details here are examples only.
If you're adding support for
a real competitor's type,
you should strive to match what they've
included in their Info.plist file.
Because this type is imported,
it tells the system about the sort of
files produced by the CompuSfood app.
But if the user has that app installed,
the system can prefer its declaration,
which should be exported,
as more authoritative.
We'll now add support for opening these
files so that the system can pick our app
when the user wants to open one of them.
We'll go back to the
Document Types section.
will create a separate entry
for Compy's food list and
add the new Type Identifier.
This entry is a little different
from the other one because
we're not the owner of the type.
Instead,
we want our handler rank to be alternate.
Because our app can read these
files but not write them,
we'd specify a role of viewer on macOS.
The system now knows
we can open this file,
but that we may not be the best choice
if the user has Compy's Food installed,
since that app is the
owner of the file type.
We want to be good
citizens on the platform,
so it's important to respect
type ownership this way,
even though we both know our code is
way better than our competitor's code.
Just as we did with our
own restaurant menu type,
we'll need to write some
Swift or Objective-C to actually
read these files in our app.
Check out developer.apple.com
for more info.
So now that we've declared a type
and told the system we support it,
it's time to work with
that type in our code.
This section assumes you're at
least broadly familiar with the
Uniform Type Identifiers API in
the core services framework.
Here we have a small program that walks
a directory or a set of file URLs.
It gets the Uniform Type Identifier
of each represented file.
And then prints a localized
description of that type identifier.
If the file is an image,
it draws it somewhere.
And if it's an audio clip,
it plays it over the
user's speakers or AirPods.
Right away,
there are some problems visible here.
We have to explicitly cast our
strings to CFStrings to use them
with the global UT type functions.
And we have to manually manage
the lifetime of the CFString we
get from UT type copy description.
But — and I'm very happy to talk to you
about this — in iOS 14 and macOS Big Sur,
we have introduced a brand new
UniForm Type Identifiers framework
that brings first-class Swiftiness
to UniForm Type Identifiers.
Where we previously used CFStrings to
represent Type Identifiers,
we can now use UTType to represent
types and their properties.
Let's walk through this code and
convert it to use the new framework.
I've imported the framework in order
to get access to the API it contains,
and now I'll change the Type Identifier
URL property to ContentType,
whose value is an
instance of a new struct,
UTType.
This struct encapsulates
a Uniform Type Identifier
alongside metadata about it.
Next, we'll fix this unretained value.
UTType has a localized
description property.
Properties like this one are a much
more natural way to work with a type's
attributes than global functions.
The value of this property
corresponds to the description
string you entered in Xcode,
and is localized when
you localize your app.
Next, let's turn to UTType Conforms To,
another global function.
This function takes a CFString,
which necessitates explicit casts.
Unsurprisingly,
UTType has a conformsTo member method.
But what are these .image and .audio?
Remember this slide?
When we were designing
this new framework,
we took a look at the set of
types declared by the system,
as well as the set of CFString constants
exposed in the old API.
And we brought them over to the
new framework as named constants.
There are over 120 such constants
defined in the new framework,
covering the most commonly
used system-defined types.
Of course, earlier in this session,
we declared some types in our app.
Wouldn't it be nice if we could
expose constants for them,
too?
I'm just full of good news today,
because you can do exactly that.
We have API for declaring named
constants for types that you export,
and for types that you import.
The semantics are a
little different for each.
When you export a type, you're saying,
"I own this type.
I created it.
My app is the authority for this
type." So we go ahead and create
an instance of UTType for you,
safe in the knowledge that you
know everything about this type.
When you import a type, you're saying,
"I know about this type,
but somebody else might know
more than me." And the owner
of that type might declare the
type differently than you did.
If that happens,
we can substitute that type on the
fly in the most common use cases.
We need your cooperation, though.
Rather than declaring your
imported types as constants,
declare them as static,
computed variables,
so that if the declaration changes
due to an app installation,
you'll pick up the updated
type automatically.
We've built support into Xcode for
detecting issues with types you declare.
We can detect if an exported or imported
type is missing from your Info.plist,
or if you used the wrong
constant initializer.
We'll work to improve
the support over time,
and your input will be invaluable here,
so please provide feedback.
A number of frameworks support our
new API in iOS 14 and macOS Big Sur.
Foundation has the
URL property I just showed you,
and it also has utilities for generating
recommended file names based on a
string or URL in an instance of UTType.
SwiftUI has extensive support for UTType.
Pasteboard and drag-and-drop APIs,
such as the onDrop event handler,
use them exclusively.
And SwiftUI's new support
for document-based apps
is designed to use UTType.
I recommend you check out "Build
Document-Based Apps in SwiftUI"
from WWDC20 to learn more about it.
When using AppKit,
NSWorkspace will let you
get an icon for any UTType.
An NSOpenPanel and
NSSavePanel support UTTypes.
UIKit supports using UTTypes
when presenting document
pickers and document browsers.
And Core Spotlight lets you create
an attribute set from a UTType.
There are a number of APIs that do
not support UTType in this release,
and you may find yourself
needing to interact with them.
It's not difficult.
If you need to pass a Uniform
Type Identifier to an API,
get the UTType's identifier
property and cast it to a CFString.
If you want to convert a Uniform
Type Identifier back to a UTType,
cast it from CFString to String and
initialize your UTType with that String.
This is a failable initializer,
so don't forget to check for nil.
In Objective-C, it's a little wordier,
but the idea is the same.
Cast the UTTypes
identifier to CFStringRef,
or cast a CFString to NSString and
create a UTType from it.
We've seen today how the system derives
a file's type from its metadata,
and how Apple encapsulates
that information using
Uniform Type Identifiers.
We've learned how to declare
and use our own types,
and how to interact with types that may
be shared among multiple applications.
And we've introduced a new
UniForm Type Identifiers
framework that provides a modern,
object-oriented way to
interact with types.
I look forward to seeing how you
use this knowledge and the new
framework to build your apps.
Thank you.